ENGLISH


The 'Columbia Journal of Transnational Law' is a law review established in 1961 focusing on issues of international law. It is produced by students at Columbia University School of Law.


The 'Columbia Journal of Transnational Law', originally named the 'Bulletin of the Columbia Society of International Law', was created by Wolfgang G. Friedmann and a group of Columbia law students belonging to the Columbia Society of International Law. The first volume, containing two issues, was a forum for the informal discussion of international legal questions; the second volume, published in 1963 under the title 'International Law Bulletin', aspired to the tradition of the scholarly law review.

During its second decade, the journal expanded publication to three issues per year, experimented with theme issues and published some of the early proceedings of the Friedmann Conference held annually at Columbia Law School. By the beginning of its third decade, the journal’s theme issues—entire issues dedicated to the examination of current international law problems—had become regular publications. These topical issues have examined international taxation, international trade embargoes and boycotts, China’s legal development, sovereign debt rescheduling, socialist law and international satellite communications.


The 'Columbia Journal of Transnational Law' is published by The Columbia Journal of Transnational Law Association, Inc., a New York corporation since 1969. The corporation is overseen by a board of directors of 18 members. The journal is further assisted by a board of advisors consisting of 11 members. The 2012-2013 editorial staff consists of 23 student editors and 55 staff members.


The journal has been cited by the Supreme Court of the United States and numerous federal appellate and trials courts.


The Wolfgang Friedmann Memorial Award is presented annually to an individual who has made outstanding contributions to the field of international law. The award is given in memory of the journal’s founder. Past recipients of the award include Senators George J. Mitchell and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, Giuliano Amato, Louis Henkin, Hans Blix, and Boutros Boutros-Ghali. The 39th Annual Wolfgang Friedmann Memorial Award will be presented to Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Shirin Ebadi on April 2, 2013.



Category:American law journals
Category:Triannual journals
Category:Publications established in 1961
Category:English-language journals