ENGLISH




'HMS 'Bellerophon' was a 74-gun French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, mostly on blockades or convoy escort duties. Known to sailors as the "Billy Ruffian", she fought in three fleet actions, the Glorious First of June, the Battle of the Nile and the Battle of Trafalgar, and was the ship aboard which Napoleon finally surrendered, ending 22 years of nearly continuous war with France.

Built at in ordinary, briefly being commissioned during the Spanish and nearly overrun by a powerful French fleet, but the bold actions of the squadron's commander, Vice-Admiral French invasion force bound for Ireland in 1797, and then joined the Sir John Jervis. Detached to reinforce Rear-Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson's fleet in 1798, she took part in the decisive defeat of a French fleet at the Battle of the Nile. She then returned to England and went out to the West Indies, where she spent the Peace of Amiens on cruises and convoy escort duty between the Caribbean and North America.

'Bellerophon' returned to European waters with the resumption of the wars with France, joining a fleet under Vice-Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood blockading John Cooke. After repairs 'Bellerophon' was employed blockading the enemy fleets in the Channel and the Rochefort. In July 1815, defeated at Waterloo and finding escape to America barred by the blockading 'Bellerophon', Napoleon came aboard "the ship that had dogged his steps for twenty years" (according to maritime historian paid off and converted to a another ship. Moved to Plymouth in 1826, she continued in service until 1834, when the last convicts left. The Admiralty ordered her to be sold in 1836, and she was broken up.

'Bellerophon's long and distinguished career has been recorded in literature and folk songs, commemorating the achievements of the "Billy Ruffian".


'Bellerophon' was ordered from the commercial shipbuilder Edward Greaves and Company, of Sir Thomas Slade. The design was resurrected and slightly altered in 1774, and approved by the Admiralty on 25 August that year.

The ship was named 'Bellerophon', a decision that had been arrived at by at least April 1782, when it was entered into the Lemprière's Classical Dictionary, which he kept on his desk. The recently ordered 74-gun ship was thereafter to be named after the Greek warrior Chimera.
thumb|alt=Drawing of a river with a rowing boat in the foreground and the hull of a sailing ship flying flags on the far bank. Small houses and buildings visible in the background.|Anonymous drawing, c. 1786, of 'Bellerophon' on the stocks at Frindsbury, prior to being launched
By the time 'Bellerophon' was launched, there was no pressing need for new warships. The signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1783 brought the seasoned, a luxury available now that there were no pressing military needs. Her final costs came to £30,232.14.4d paid to Greaves for building her, and a further £8,376.15.2d spent on fitting her for service.

Laid up at Chatham during the years of peace, 'Bellerophon' was not commissioned until July 1790, when the crisis known as the Thomas Pasley, arrived on 19 July and began the process of preparing her for service. After a month spent fitting out the ship with guns, masts, stores and rigging, and recruiting a crew, Pasley gave the orders for his crew to slip the moorings on 16 August, and 'Bellerophon' made her way down the Medway to the fleet anchorage at the Nore.

thumb|alt=Half-length portrait of a grey-haired man in a navy blue jacket with gold buttons and braid, wearing a medal.|Sir Thomas Pasley, depicted as a rear-admiral in a 1795 portrait by Lemuel Francis Abbott. 'Bellerophon's first commander, he is shown wearing the Naval Gold Medal he won while commanding her.
From the Nore, 'Bellerophon' proceeded to the Downs and joined the fleet stationed there. She spent three weeks in the roadstead, exercising her guns, before moving to Spithead.


With the outbreak of the Lord Howe. 'Bellerophon' lost her bowsprit, foremast and main topmast, and had her figurehead and cutwater smashed, which necessitated putting into Plymouth for repairs.

After being repaired, 'Bellerophon' rejoined the Channel Fleet, which by now was patrolling the Western Approaches. She developed a reputation for speed during these duties, and was given the nickname of "The Flying Bellerophon". For the next five months the Channel Fleet patrolled off Ushant and the Brittany coast.



The Channel Fleet played an important role in the closing stages of the rear-admiral, and his flying squadron, consisting of 'Bellerophon' and the 74-gun ships ,  and , ahead to scout for French forces.
thumb|left|alt=Black and white print of a large sailing warship in the centre in a cloud of smoke, a second ship visible in the background, other ships vaguely visible through the smoke.|'Lord Howe engaging the French Fleet under Adm Villaret on the 29th May', a 1799 aquatint after Nicholas Pocock, showing Howe's flagship, 'Queen Charlotte' cutting the French line. Emerging through the smoke behind her and following the commander in chief through the line is 'Bellerophon'.
The action resumed the following morning, with Howe closing on the French and then cutting through their line. 'Bellerophon' followed Howe's 'Éole' until the French ship was forced out of the line. Hope then signalled the frigate  to tow the 'Bellerophon' clear of the action.

'Bellerophon' returned with the fleet to England after the battle, where the wounded Pasley left the ship. 'Bellerophon' was taken into Portsmouth Dockyard for repairs, and then resumed her patrols in the Western Approaches with the Channel Fleet.



thumb|right|alt=Black and white print of a number of sailing ships on a choppy sea and under a cloudy sky.|'Admiral Cornwallis's Retreat from the French Fleet', an 1802 engraving of a work by William Anderson, depicting Cornwallis's Retreat
'Bellerophon' returned to sea in May 1795 after three months anchored in the Sir William Cornwallis which was patrolling off Ushant. The squadron had arrived on station on 7 June, and the following day captured a convoy of eight French merchants off cutter, under Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse. Heavily outnumbered, Cornwallis ordered a retreat, but the 'Bellerophon' and  sailed unusually slowly and he found himself being steadily overhauled by the French. Keeping his ships together, Cornwallis ordered 'Bellerophon' to take up position at the head of his line, later explaining that "The Bellerophon I was glad to keep in some measure as a reserve, having reason at first to suppose there would be full occasion for the utmost exertions of us all&nbsp;... I considered that ship a treasure in store, having heard of her former accomplishments, and observing the spirit manifested by all on board when she passed me, joined to the zeal and activity shewed by Lord Cranstoun during the whole cruize."

After a full day of pursuit, the leading French ships made an attempt to cut off , trailing in the British rear. Cornwallis dropped back to support 'Mars', while Captain Robert Stopford of HMS 'Phaeton' began making signals implying a British fleet was in sight. When French lookouts spotted distant topsails, Villaret de Joyeuse decided that Cornwallis's actions meant that a British fleet was approaching to support him, and called off the pursuit. There was no British fleet in the vicinity; the topsails were those of a convoy of British merchantmen.


'Bellerophon' returned to England in June, before departing to patrol the Western Approaches until September. She entered Portsmouth Dockyard again in October and underwent a refit costing £8,103.


thumb|alt=Print of Five sailing ships, four seen stern on, and the fifth from the side. A town and coastline in the background, with a line of distant ships in front of it.|'Cadiz June 1797. The inshore blockading squadron coming to an anchor', by Thomas Buttersworth, 1797. From left to right, 'Bellerophon',  (in port view), ,  and .
'Bellerophon' rendezvoused with Jervis's fleet in the Bay of Cadiz on 30 May 1797. Three days later she was visited for the only time by Horatio Nelson, then a rear-admiral and in command of the inshore squadron of the blockading fleet. 'Bellerophon' was with the fleet in the Bay of Cadiz until October, when Jervis took it to sea to patrol between Thomas Troubridge and ordered to rendezvous with and reinforce Nelson's squadron. Nelson was in the Mediterranean hunting for a large French fleet which had sailed from Toulon carrying troops.

The French had embarked on a complex land and naval campaign in the Mediterranean, with the ultimate aim of launching an invasion and occupation of Egypt. The British were aware that the French had amassed a large army, led by General Napoleon Bonaparte, but their destination was unknown. Rendezvousing with Troubridge's squadron on 7 June, Nelson now had a sufficient force to engage the French, and began to comb the Mediterranean. The search lasted nearly two months, with the British force tracking westwards, and then back east, sometimes missing the French force by days. The French force, after invading and capturing Malta, arrived off Alexandria on 1 July and began landing troops. It was not until 25 July that news reached Nelson, by then at anchor off Sicily, that the French fleet had appeared off Egypt. He took his fleet to sea, and arrived off Alexandria on 1 August, but found the harbour empty. Heading east, he discovered the French fleet, consisting of thirteen ships of the line, four frigates and a number of gunboats, at anchor in Abu Qir Bay.



It was late on 1 August when the British fleet appeared in the bay, and the French were at anchor in a strong defensive position. The French commander, Vice-Admiral 'Orient'.
thumb|alt=Coloured print of a naval battle between sailing ships. A single ship seen bow on in the centre, a cluster of ships in the left background, and a large ship on fire in the centre background. Two ships to the right, one without masts seen side on, and one seen stern on, are visible, with a column of smoke rising from the burning ship to the top of the picture.|A 1799 depiction of the Battle of the Nile by Thomas Whitcombe. The 'Orient' is on fire, and visible under her stern, and drifting clear of the burning ship, is the dismasted 'Bellerophon'.
'Bellerophon' now found herself in a desperate position. The much more powerful three-decked 'Orient' fired several broadsides into the 'Bellerophon', smashing her boats, dismounting guns and cutting rigging. Command then devolved to the first lieutenant, Lieutenant Daniel. Daniel and the second lieutenant, Lieutenant Lander, were both wounded, but were able to direct the fighting until a shot took away Daniel's left leg. As he was carried below he was hit by grapeshot and killed outright. After an hour fighting 'Orient' alone, 'Bellerophon's 'Tonnant'.

As 'Bellerophon' slowly drifted away, she was sighted by the 74-gun , approaching the centre. It was by now about 9 pm; in the darkness 'Swiftsure's captain, Benjamin Hallowell, was unable to identify the dismasted ship and presumed that she was a damaged French ship attempting to escape. He debated firing into her, but decided to hold fire and press on to the French centre, where he eventually came to anchor astern of 'Orient', close to 'Bellerophon's original position. Eight more died of their wounds in the following week.




After carrying out temporary repairs in Abu Qir Bay, 'Bellerophon' hoisted 'Spartiate' with HMS 'Majestic', sailed to Lord Garlies and sailed in August to rejoin the Channel Fleet, which was blockading Brest. Lord Garlies was superseded by Captain John Loring on 25 November, and 'Bellerophon' continued on the blockade until receiving new orders in early March 1802.

'Bellerophon' was among five ships ordered to join Admiral John Duckworth's squadron in the West Indies, and having stored, she sailed from Jamaica Passage and escorted merchant convoys between Jamaica and Halifax.




'Bellerophon' was in the West Indies when the 'Poisson Volant' and . On 24 July the squadron, made up of 'Bellerophon' and the 74-gun ships HMS 'Elephant',  and HMS 'Vanguard', came across two French 74-gun ships, 'Duquesne' and 'Duguay-Trouin', and the frigate 'Guerrière', attempting to escape from Cap-François. One man was killed aboard 'Bellerophon' during the pursuit.  She remained blockading Cap-François until November, when the French commander of the garrison there, General Rochambeau, approached Loring and requested to be allowed to evacuate his men, which were being besieged by a native Haitian force led by 'Surveillante', 'Clorinde' and 'Vertu', and a number of smaller ships, and were escorted to Jamaica by the squadron.

thumb|left|alt=Half-length portrait of a man facing to the right, in a gold buttoned and braided navy blue coat|Captain John Cooke,  captain at the Battle of Trafalgar, painted c. 1797–1803 by Lemuel Francis Abbott. 

A particularly severe outbreak of malaria struck the ship in early February 1804; 212 members of 'Bellerophon's crew fell ill. 17 died aboard the ship, while 100 had to be transferred to a shore-based hospital, where a further 40 died.


In May 1805 a large French fleet under the command of Vice-Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood to patrol the Federico Gravina, and had sailed into the Atlantic, pursued by Nelson's Mediterranean Fleet. While Nelson chased Villeneuve around the West Indies without making contact, Collingwood mounted a blockade of Cadiz. His squadron was still there in mid-August when Villeneuve appeared off the port with his fleet. Possessing too few ships to intercept the combined fleet, Collingwood allowed them to enter Cadiz, and then remounted the blockade. He was reinforced with a number of ships over the next few months, with Nelson taking over command on 28 September.



Nelson mounted a loose blockade of the combined fleet, keeping most of his fleet out of sight, but with a line of frigates and larger ships stationed at intervals between himself and Cadiz. On 19 October the combined fleet was observed to be putting to sea, and the signal was passed down the line of ships. port side.
thumb|alt=Coloured print of a naval battle between sailing ships. Four ships seen stern on in the right of the picture, obscured by clouds of smoke, a fifth ship seen bow on in the left.|'Situation of the Bellerophon at the moment of the death of her gallant commander Captn. Cooke', early-nineteenth century aquatint by Thomas Whitcombe, showing the 'Bellerophon' surrounded by enemy ships at the moment of Cooke's death
At 12:30 pm, 'Bellerophon' cut through the enemy line, slipping under the stern of the Spanish 74-gun 'Monarca' and firing two broadsides into her. Moving past the Spanish ship, 'Bellerophon' collided with the French 74-gun 'Aigle', hitting 'Aigle's port quarter with her starboard bow, and entangling the two ships' yards. Locked together, they exchanged broadsides at close range, with soldiers aboard 'Aigle' sweeping 'Bellerophon's decks with musket fire and 'San Juan Nepomuceno' and 'Bahama', and the French 'Swiftsure'. 'Bellerophon's main and mizzenmasts were shot away at 1 pm, and at 1:11 pm, Captain Cooke was hit and killed. An eyewitness recorded that <blockquote>He had discharged his pistols very frequently at the enemy, who as often attempted to board, and he had killed a French officer on his own quarterdeck. He was in the act of reloading his pistols&nbsp;... when he received two musket-balls in the breast. He immediately fell, and upon the quartermaster going up and asking him if he should take him down below, his answer was "No, let me lie quietly one minute. Tell Lieutenant Cumby never to strike."</blockquote>

With Cooke dead, Cumby assumed command. 'Bellerophon's decks had largely been cleared by French fire, and boarding parties began to make their way onto the ship. Several French sailors climbed out onto 'Bellerophon's spritsail yard, but a 'Bellerophon' crewman released the brace holding the yard, causing them to fall into the sea. French sailors holding onto 'Bellerophon's rails had their hands beaten until they were forced to let go. 'Bellerophon's magazine. The resulting fire was quickly extinguished, preventing a catastrophic explosion.

By 1:40 pm, having been under heavy fire for over an hour, 'Aigle's crew lowered her gunports and slowly moved away.


For the next seven days, 'Bellerophon's crew were occupied in repairing damage, rigging jury masts, and trying to ride out the storm that struck the area immediately after the battle. She put into Gibraltar on 28 October, and underwent emergency repairs to allow her to return to England as an escort for , together with . Both 'Belleisle' and 'Bellerophon' required urgent attention, but it was deemed appropriate that they should have the honour of accompanying Nelson's body back to Britain aboard 'Victory'.

The three ships sailed together as far as Start Point, where on 2 December 'Victory' separated to head to Portsmouth, while 'Bellerophon' and 'Belleisle' put into Cawsand Bay. 'Bellerophon' was then taken into Plymouth Dockyard to be repaired, returning to active duty on 26 February, still under Rotheram's command.


Rotheram's command lasted for two and half years, until he was superseded on 8 June 1808 by Captain Samuel Warren. Warren was ordered to take 'Bellerophon' and join the fleet in the Alan Gardner's squadron. By 1809 the strategic situation in the Baltic had deteriorated after Russia signed the Sir James Saumarez. Saumarez dispatched 'Bellerophon' and  north to the Hango.

By July 'Bellerophon' was part of a squadron commanded by Captain Thomas Byam Martin of HMS 'Implacable'. They were off Percola Point on 7 July when a flotilla of eight Russian gunboats was sighted. A boat party led by Lieutenant Hawkey of 'Implacable' made an attempt to cut-out the vessels that evening. Hawkey was killed in the attempt, but 'Bellerophon's Lieutenant Charles Allen took over command, and six of the gunboats were captured, and a seventh destroyed, with 12 craft containing stores for the Russian Army also being taken. 'Bellerophon' made several cruises during the rest of the year, visiting the Åland Islands and Karlskrona, before returning to Britain with a convoy in November 1809.


thumb|right|alt=Half-length oval portrait engraving of a man in a gold buttoned coat and epaulettes, with tousled hair and sideburns.|Frederick Lewis Maitland, 'Bellerophon's last captain, and the man who received Napoleon's surrender. An 1826 engraving of a portrait by Samuel Woodforde.
'Bellerophon' was briefly refitted in January 1810, after which she was anchored at the Nore. She then resumed her blockade duties in the North Sea, serving under a succession of commanders. Warren was succeeded by Captain Sir Richard Goodwin Keats, the newly appointed Governor of Newfoundland. 'Bellerophon' transported Keats to St. John's, and then sailed south to Frederick Lewis Maitland.

In May 'Bellerophon' sailed to Plymouth and joined a squadron under Rear-Admiral Sir Henry Hotham, with orders to join the blockade of the French Atlantic ports. Hotham, flying his flag in , sent Maitland in 'Bellerophon' to watch Rochefort, where two frigates, a brig and a corvette were lying in the harbour. 'Bellerophon' spent over a month on this station, patrolling the approaches to the port and intercepting coastal vessels. Meanwhile Napoleon had been defeated at the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy imminent, Napoleon hoped to be allowed to sail to the United States. News reached Maitland in early July that Napoleon was in Rochefort, and two 20-gun ships,  and , were sent to reinforce 'Bellerophon' and patrol the other entrances to the port.


Napoleon was being pressured to leave French soil by the interim French government in Paris. If he delayed, he risked becoming a prisoner of the Bourbons, Prussians or Austrians. The alternative was to surrender to the British and request political asylum. On 10 July Napoleon sent two emissaries, General Comte de Las Cases, out to 'Bellerophon' to meet Maitland and discuss the possibility of allowing Napoleon to travel to the United States. Maitland was under orders to prevent this, and instead offered to take Napoleon on board his ship and transport him and his retinue to Britain. Further discussions and negotiations took place over the next few days, but with his options running out, Napoleon had decided by 13 July to surrender to the British. On 14 July Maitland was given a letter informing him that Napoleon would come out to the 'Bellerophon' the following morning to surrender.
thumb|upright|left|alt=Bordered engraving of a man in uniform on the deck of a sailing ship presenting a second man in uniform with a sword, as two men and a woman in formal clothes watch.|'The surrender of Buonaparte on board the Bellerophon', a popular, and somewhat stylised, 1816 print by G. M. Brighty, showing the moment of Napoleon's surrender to Captain Maitland
Napoleon embarked aboard the brig 'Épervier' early in the morning of 15 July, and made his way out to the 'Bellerophon'. As he approached, the 74-gun 'Superb', flying Vice-Admiral Hotham's flag, was sighted approaching. Concerned that the brig might not reach 'Bellerophon' before the 'Superb' arrived, and that consequently Hotham would take over and receive Napoleon himself, Maitland sent 'Bellerophon's barge to collect the former Emperor and transfer him to the ship. At some point between 6 and 7 am, the barge pulled alongside 'Bellerophon' and General marines came to attention, and Napoleon walked to the quarterdeck, took his hat off to Maitland and in French announced "I am come to throw myself on the protection of your Prince and your laws." Maitland bowed in response. With the former emperor in custody aboard a British warship, the Napoleonic Wars were finally over. To maritime historian David Cordingly, this moment was 'Bellerophon's "crowning glory [when] six weeks after the battle of Waterloo,&nbsp;... Napoleon, trapped in Rochefort, surrendered to the captain of the ship that had dogged his steps for more than twenty years."


thumb|right|alt=A group of men in military uniform and formal clothes stand to the left, looking towards a single man in a greatcoat and bicorne hat stood by the rail of a ship looking out to sea|'Napoleon on Board the Bellerophon', exhibited in 1880 by Sir William Quiller Orchardson. Orchardson depicts the morning of 23 July, as Napoleon watches the French shoreline recede. His retinue, from left to right Planat, Montholon, Maingaut, Las Cases, Savary, Lallemand and Bertrand, look on. In the background, Las Cases's son leans over the rail.
Maitland showed Napoleon the great cabin, which he had placed at his disposal, and gave him a tour of his ship. At 10:30 am the 'Superb' anchored in the roadstead and Maitland went to make his report. Hotham approved of his arrangements, and agreed that Napoleon should be transported to England aboard the 'Bellerophon'. He came aboard himself to meet the former Emperor, and a grand dinner was held in the great cabin, attended by Napoleon's retinue and British officers. The following day Napoleon visited Hotham on the 'Superb', and after his return, Maitland began the voyage to England in company with HMS 'Myrmidon'. A routine was soon developed, with Napoleon usually taking a walk on deck around 5 pm, followed by a formal dinner at 6 pm. The sailors and officers removed their hats and kept their distance when Napoleon came on deck, only talking with him if he invited them to. The routine was broken slightly early in the morning of 23 July, when Napoleon appeared at dawn, as 'Bellerophon' came in sight of Ushant, the last piece of French land visible for the remainder of the journey. He climbed up to the poop deck, attended by a midshipman, and spent the morning watching the coastline slowly recede from view. He was joined by members of his retinue, though he did not speak to any of them.
thumb|left|alt=Oil painting of a three three-masted sailing ships seen from side against a background of cliffs, with many small boats filled with people in the foreground, and a larger single-masted boat in the right foreground.|'Scene in Plymouth Sound in August 1815', an 1817 painting by John James Chalon. 'Bellerophon' is at the centre of the picture, surrounded by crowds of people in small boats who have come to see Napoleon.
'Bellerophon' anchored off Lord Keith to "prevent every person whatever from coming on board the ship you command, except the officers and men who compose her crew." Despite turning away the shore boats which approached the anchored warship bringing fresh bread and fruit to sell, word eventually leaked out that Napoleon was aboard the ship. The news created a sensation, and large numbers of boats filled with sightseers soon surrounded the ship. Occasionally Napoleon would come out to look at them, but despite entreaties from some people to be allowed on board, Maitland refused to allow any contact between ship and shore. On 26 July 'Bellerophon' received orders to proceed to Plymouth harbour where Lord Keith was anchored aboard his flagship . Napoleon remained on board 'Bellerophon' and the ship was kept isolated from the throngs of curious sightseers by two guardships,  and , anchored close at hand.

'Bellerophon' spent two weeks in Plymouth harbour while the authorities came to a decision about what to do with Napoleon. On 31 July they communicated their decision to the former emperor. Napoleon was to be exiled to the remote island of Saint Helena. He would be allowed to take three officers, his surgeon, and twelve servants. 'Bellerophon' was not to take him into exile. The Admiralty was concerned that the ageing ship was unsuitable for the long voyage to the South Atlantic, and the 74-gun  was selected for the task. On 4 August, Lord Keith ordered 'Bellerophon' to go to sea and await the arrival of HMS 'Northumberland'. On 7 August Napoleon thanked Maitland and his crew for their kindness and hospitality, and left the 'Bellerophon' where he had spent over three weeks without ever landing in England. He boarded 'Northumberland', which then sailed for Saint Helena.

Captain Maitland's account of the time Napoleon spent on board his ship was published in 1826.


Having discharged Napoleon, 'Bellerophon' sailed to Sheerness, and anchored there on 2 September. There she was paid off for the last time, and stripped of her guns and masts.
thumb|A prison hulk, similar to how 'Bellerophon' would have appeared. This 1829 drawing by alt=Drawing of the hull of sailing ship without masts, with barred windows, washing strung between poles, a raised superstructure and a barge alongside filled with people.
The work was completed at a cost of £12,081 and the prisoners were transferred in January 1817.  She continued as a prison ship for boys until early 1826, when it was decided that the arrangement of the internal spaces made her unsuitable for workshops. The boys were transferred to another hulk, the former , and it was decided to move 'Captivity' to Plymouth. She arrived there in June and spent the last eight years of her working existence as a convict hulk in Plymouth. By 1834 the rate of Navy Department, who put her up for sale. Advertisements in the local 'Plymouth, Devonport and Stonehouse News' in September 1836 announced the auctioning off of her timber.


Some of 'Bellerophon's timber was bought at auction by George Bellamy, who had been 'Bellerophon's surgeon at the Nile. Bellamy incorporated them into a cottage he was building at Plymstock. Captain Maitland bought part of her figurehead and some of her stern ornaments, later depositing them in the collections of what eventually became the Royal Naval Museum. The National Maritime Museum holds several relics relating to 'Bellerophon' and the people connected with her, including Captain John Cooke's dirk, sword and pistol, and a trophy presented to Admiral Pasley by Lloyd's of London. Their collections also contain artefacts relating to her connection with Napoleon, including the couch from Maitland's cabin, and the skull of a goat which supplied milk for Napoleon and his suite.


thumb|right||alt=Oil painting of a man in a green uniform, white breeches and black bicorne hat leaning his right arm against a wooden partition draped with a flag.|'Napoleon on the 'Bellerophon' at Plymouth', by Sir Charles Lock Eastlake, 1815. Eastlake was rowed out to the 'Bellerophon' to make sketches, from which he later painted this portrait.
The ship and her crew feature or are mentioned in several historical novels set during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, including several of the Aubrey–Maturin series of novels by Patrick O'Brian.

'Bellerophon' appears in a number of artworks, including several depicting the ship's role in Napoleon's surrender. Sir William Quiller Orchardson painted 'Napoleon on the Bellerophon', depicting the former emperor standing on the poop deck, watching the French coastline recede as his retinue look on.

'Bellerophon' is mentioned in several verses in a song commemorating Cornwallis's Retreat in 1795, which celebrate both Cornwallis (referred to by sailors' popular nickname for him, "Billy Blue"), and 'Bellerophon's fighting record at the Glorious First of June. The folk song "Boney was a Warrior", about the life of Napoleon, includes a verse celebrating the ship's links with his ultimate surrender.<blockquote>Boney went a-cruisin'<br>'Way-aye-yah!'<br>Aboard the Billy Ruffian<br>'Johnny Franswor!'</blockquote>

